
This textbook on Political Economy, prepared by the Economics
Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., was first
published in the U.S.S.R. in 1954. Regarding political economy as the
science of the laws of development of the relations of production in
human society, it deals not only with the capitalist economic system
but also with pre- capitalist economic relations and, in considerable
detail, with the economics of socialism. In their Foreword the authors
stress that their aim is not dogmatic but scientific, and that they would
welcome discussion and critical comments by all readers.

POLITICAL ECONOMY

A Textbook issued by the Institute of
Economics the Academy of Sciences
of the U.S.S.R

1957
LAWRENCE & WISHART
LONDON

This Soviet textbook on POLITICAL ECQNOMY was first published in
Moscow in 1954. A second revised and enlarged edition appeared in
1955, and a third edition is in preparation. The present translation has
been made from the second Russian edition, and edited by C. P. Dutt
and Andrew Rothstein.

Printed and bound in Great Britain by Jarrold and Sons Ltd., Norwich

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION
This textbook of political economy has been written by a group of
economists comprising: Academician K.V. Ostrovityanov; Corresponding
Member of the V.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences D.T. Shepilov; Corresponding
Member of the V.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences L.A. Leontyev; Member of the AllUnion Lenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences I.D. Laptev; Professor I.I.
Kuzminov; Doctor of Economic Sciences L.M. Gatovsky; Academician P.F.
Yudin; Corresponding Member of the V.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences A.I.
Pashkov; and Candidate [Master] of Economic Sciences V. I. Pereslegin, Doctor
of Economic Sciences V. N. Starovsky took part in the selection and editing of
the statistical information included in the textbook.
In connection with the drafting of the textbook a large number of Soviet
economists made valuable critical observations and contributed numerous
useful suggestions concerning the text. These observations and suggestions
were taken into account by the authors in their subsequent work on the book.
Of very great importance for the work on this textbook was the economic
discussion organised in November 1951 by the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In the course of this discussion, in which
hundreds of Soviet economists took an active part, the draft for a textbook of
political economy submitted by the authors was subjected to a thorough critical
examination. The proposals worked out as the result of this discussion for
improving the draft of the textbook were an important source of improvement
in the structure of the textbook and of enrichment of its content.
The final editing of the textbook was carried out by comrades K.V.
Ostrovityanov, D.T. Shepilov, L.A. Leontyev, I.D. Laptev, I.I. Kuzminov and L.
M. Gatovsky.
Being fully aware of the importance of a Marxist textbook of political
economy, the authors intend to continue to work on further improvement of
the text, on the basis of critical observations and suggestions which readers
may make when they have acquainted themselves with the first edition. In this
connection, the authors request readers to address their comments and
suggestions on the textbook to the following address:
Institute of Economics,
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences,
14 Volkhonka,
Moscow

FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION
The first edition of the Political Economy textbook, published at the end of
1954 in over six million copies, was rapidly sold out. Besides the Russian
original, there were versions in many of the languages of the peoples of the
U.S.S.R., and the book was also published in a number of foreign countries.
The need has arisen for a second edition of the textbook. In preparing this
edition the authors have made it their task to strengthen the text with new
propositions and facts reflecting the steady growth of the socialist economy of
the U.S.S.R. and the countries of People’s Democracy and also the further
intensification of the general crisis of capitalism.
The authors have endeavoured to take into account as fully as possible the
experience gained in using this textbook in higher educational institutions, in
Party schools and study- groups and for purposes of individual study. During
the past year the book has been discussed in many university departments of
political economy, and these have sent in their comments and requests. The
authors have also received a large number of letters from readers, containing
suggestions regarding the text. Broad conferences of economists were held in
March and April 1955 to discuss thoroughly the first edition of the book, these
being attended by research workers, teachers and business executives in
Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Minsk, Riga, Tallinn, Vilnius, Tbilisi, Erevan, Baku,
Tashkent, Ashkhabad, Stalinabad, Alma-Ata and Sverdlovsk.
The authors have carefully studied all the critical observations and proposals
regarding the textbook which have been made at conferences of university
departments of political economy, at meetings of economists and in readers’
letters, and have tried to use all of these that made for improving the book. At
the same time they have maintained as their point of departure the need to
keep to the present type of textbook, intended for the general reader, and not
to allow its size to be enlarged to any considerable extent.
The final editing of the second edition has been carried out by comrades K.V.
Ostrovityanov, D.T. Shepilov, L.A. Leontyev, I.D. Laptev, I.I. Kuzminov and
L. M. Gatovksy.
Comrade V.N. Starovsky took part in the selection and editing of the
statistical information contained in the book.
The authors express their thanks to all the comrades who helped in the
preparation of the second edition of this textbook through their critical
comments and suggestions. The authors intend to continue to work on the
improvement of the textbook, and in this connection request readers to send
their comments and suggestions to the following address:
Institute of Economics,
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences,
14 Volkhonka,
Moscow
September I955

CONTENTS
Chapter
Introduction
Part One:
PRE-CAPITALIST MODES OF PRODUCTION
I. The Primitive Communal Mode of Production
II. The Slave-Owning Mode of Production
III. The Feudal Mode of Production

Page

Part Two:
THE CAPITALIST MODE OF PRODUCTION
A. PRE-MONOPOLY CAPITALISM
IV. Commodity Production. Commodities and Money
V. Capitalist Simple Co-operation and Manufacture
VI. The Machine Period of Capitalism
VII. Capital and Surplus-Value. The Basic Economic Law of Capitalism
VIII. Wages
IX. Accumulation of Capital and Impoverishment of the Proletariat.
X. Rotation and Turnover of Capital
XI. Average Profit and Price of Production
XII. Merchant Capital and Merchants’ Profit
XIII. Loan Capital and Loan Interest. Circulation of Money
XIV. Ground-Rent. Agrarian Relations under Capitalism
XV. The National Income
XVI. Reproduction of Social Capital
XVII. Economic Crises
B. MONOPOLY CAPITALISM-IMPERIALISM
Chapter
XVIII. Imperialism-The Highest Stage of Capitalism. The Basic
Economic Law of Mono
poly Capitalism
XIX. The Colonial System of Imperialism
XX. The Place of Imperialism in History
XXI. The General Crisis of Capitalism
XXII. The Aggravation of the General Crisis of Capitalism after
the Second World War
ECONOMIC DOCTRINES OF THE CAPITALIST EPOCH
Part Three:
THE SOCIALIST MODE OF PRODUCTION
A. THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD FROM CAPITALISM TO SOCIALISM
XXIII. Main Features of the Transitional Period from Capitalism to

Socialism
XXIV. Socialist Industrialisation
XXV. The Collectivisation of Agriculture
XXVI. The Victory of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.
B. THE SOCIALIST ECONOMIC SYSTEM
XXVII. The Material Production Basis of Socialism
XXVIII. Social Ownership of the Means of Production-The
Foundation of the Production Relations of Socialism
XXIX. The Basic Economic Law of Socialism
XXX. The Law of Planned Proportional Development of the
National Economy
XXXI. Social Labour in Socialist Society
XXXII. Commodity Production, the Law of Value, and Money,
in Socialist Society
XXXIII. Wages in Socialist Economy
XXXIV. Economic Accounting and Profitability Costs and Price
XXXV. The Socialist System of Agriculture
XXXVI. Trade in Socialist Economy
XXXVII. The National Income of Socialist Society
XXXVIII. State Budget, Credit, and Currency Circulation
in Socialist Society
XXXIX. Socialist Reproduction
XL. The Gradual Transition from Socialism to Communism
C. THE BUILDING OF SOCIALISM IN THE
COUNTRIES OF PEOPLE’S DEMOCRACY
XLI. The Economic System of the People’s Democracies in Europe
XLII. The Economic System of the Chinese People’s Republic
XLIII. Economic Collaboration between the Countries of the Socialist
Camp
CONCLUSION
INDEX

INTRODUCTION
Political economy belongs to the category of the social sciences.1 It studies the
laws of the social production and distribution of material wealth at the various
stages of development of human society.
The basis of the life of society is material production. In order to live, people
must have food, clothing and other material means of life. In order to have
these, people must produce them, they must work.
Men produce the material means of life, i.e., carry on their struggle with
nature, not as isolated individuals but together, in groups and societies.
Consequently, production is always and under all circumstances social
production, and labour is an activity of social man.
The process of producing material wealth presupposes the following factors:
(1) human labour; (2) the subject of labour; and (3) the means of labour.
Labour is a purposive activity of the human being in the process of which he
transforms and adapts natural objects so as to satisfy his own requirements.
Labour is a natural necessity, an indispensable condition for man’s existence.
Without labour human life itself would be impossible.
Everything to which man’s labour is directed is a subject of labour. Subjects
of labour may be directly provided by nature, as, for example, wood, which is
cut in the forest, or ore, which is extracted from the bowels of the earth.
Subjects of labour which have previously been subjected to the action of labour
(e.g., ore in a metal works, cotton in a spinning mill, yarn in a weaving mill)
are called raw materials.
Means of labour consist of all those things with the aid of which man acts
upon the subject of his labour and transforms it. To the category of means of
labour belong, first and fore- most, the instruments of production, together
with land, buildings used for production purposes, roads, canals, storehouses,
etc. The determining role among the means of labour is played by the
instruments of production. These comprise the various kinds of tools which
man uses in his working activity, beginning with the crude stone implements of
primitive man and ending with modern machinery. The level of development of
the instruments of production provides the criterion of society’s mastery over
nature, the criterion of the development of production. Economic epochs
are distinguished one from another not by what is produced but by how
material wealth is produced, with what instruments of production.
The subjects of labour and the means of labour constitute the means of
production. Means of production in themselves, not associated with labour
power, can produce nothing. For the labour process, the process of producing
material wealth, to begin, labour power must be united with the instruments of
production.
Labour power is man’s ability to work, the sum total of the physical and
spiritual forces of man, thanks to which he is able to produce material wealth.
1

The name of this science, “political economy”, comes from the Greek words “politeia”
and “oikonomia”. The word “politeia” means “social organisation”. The word “oikonomia” is
made up of two words: “oikos”-household, or household affairs, and “nomos”-law. The science
of political economy received its name only at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

Labour power is the active element in production, which sets the means of
production in motion. With the development of the instruments of production
man’s ability to work also develops, his skill, habits of work, and production
experience.
The instruments of production, by means of which material wealth is
produced, and the people who set these instruments in motion and accomplish
the production of material values, thanks to the production experience and
habits of work which they possess, constitute the productive forces of society.
The working masses are the basic productive force of human society in all
stages of its development.
The productive forces reflect the relationship of people to the objects and
forces of nature used for the production of material wealth. In production,
however, men act not only upon nature but also upon each other.
“They produce only by co-operating in a certain way and mutually
exchanging their activities. In order to produce, they enter into definite
connections and relations with one another and only within these social
connections and relations does their action on nature, does production,
take place.” (Marx, “Wage-Labour and Capital”, Marx and Engels, Selected
Works, 1950, English edition, vol. I, p. 83.)
The definite social connections and relations formed between people in the
process of the production of material wealth constitute production relations.
Production relations include: (a) forms of ownership of the means of
production; (b) the position of the various social groups in production which
result from this, and their mutual relations; (c) the forms of distribution of
products that follow from the ownership of the means of production and
people’s position in production.
The character of production relations depends on who owns the means of
production (land, woods, waters, subsoil, raw materials, instruments of
production, buildings used for production, means of communication and
transport, etc.)whether they are the property of particular persons, social
groups or classes, which use these means of production in order to exploit the
working people, or whether they are the property of society, whose aim is the
satisfaction of the material and cultural requirements of the masses of the
people, of society as a whole. The state of production relations shows how the
means of production are distributed among the members of society and,
consequently, how the material wealth produced by people is distributed. Thus,
the determining feature, the basis of production relations is one or another
form of property in the means of production.
The relations of production determine also corresponding relations of
distribution. Distribution is the connecting link between production and
consumption.
The products which are produced in society serve either productive or
personal consumption. Productive consumption means the use of means of
production to create material wealth. Personal consumption means the
satisfaction of man’s requirements in food, clothing, shelter, etc.
The distribution of the objects of personal consumption which are produced
depends on the distribution of the means of production. In capitalist society the

means of production belong to the capitalists, and in consequence the products
of labour also belong to the capitalists. The workers are deprived of means of
production and, so as not to die of hunger, are obliged to work for the
capitalists, who appropriate the products of their labour. In socialist society the
means of production are public property. In consequence, the products of
labour belong to the working people themselves.
In those social formations in which commodity production exists, the
distribution of material wealth takes place through exchange of commodities.
Production, distribution, exchange and consumption constitute a unity, in which
the determining role is played by production. The particular forms of
distribution, exchange and consumption so determined exert in their turn a
reciprocal influence upon production, either facilitating its development or
hindering it.
The sum total of the
“relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the
real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to
which’ correspond definite forms of social consciousness.” (Marx, “Preface to
a Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy,” Marx and Engels,
Selected Works, 1950, English edition, vol. I, p. 329).
Having come into existence, the superstructure exercises in its turn a
reciprocal active influence on the basis, hastening or hindering the
development of the latter.
Production has a technical aspect and a social aspect. The technical aspect of
production is studied. by the natural and technical sciences: physics, chemistry,
metallurgy, engineering, agronomy and others. Political economy studies the
social aspect of production, the social-production, i.e., the economic, relations
between people. “Political economy”, wrote V. I. Lenin, “is not at all concerned
with ‘production’ but with the social relations between people in production, the
social system of production.” (Lenin, “Development of Capitalism in Russia”,
Works, vol. III, pp. 40-1.)
Political economy studies production relations in their interaction with the
productive forces. The productive forc6S and the production relations as a
unity constitute the mode of production.
The productive forces are the most mobile and revolutionary factor in
production. The development of production begins with changes in the
productive forces-first of all with changes and development in the instruments
of production, and thereafter corresponding changes also take place in the
sphere of production relations. Production relations between men, which
develop in dependence upon the development of the productive forces,
themselves in turn actively affect the productive forces.
The productive forces of society can develop uninterruptedly only where the
production relations correspond to the nature of the productive forces. At a
certain stage of their development the productive forces outgrow the
framework of the given production relations and come into contradiction with
them. The production relations are transformed from being forms of
development of the productive forces into fetters upon them.
As a result, the old production relations sooner or later give place to new

ones, which correspond to the level of development which has been attained
and to the character of the productive forces of society. With the change in the
economic basis of society its superstructure also changes. The material
premises for the replacement of old production relations by new ones arise and
develop within the womb of the old formation. The new production relations
open up scope for the development of the productive forces.
Thus an economic law of the development of society is the law of obligatory
correspondence of production relations to the nature of the productive forces.
In society based on private property and the exploitation of man by man,
conflicts between the productive forces and the production relations are
expressed in the form of class struggle; In these conditions the replacement of
an old mode of production by a new one is effected by way of social revolution.
Political economy is an historical science. It is concerned with material
production in its historically determined social form, with the economic laws
which are inherent in particular modes of production. Economic laws express
the essential nature of economic phenomena and processes, the internal,
causal connection and dependence existing between them.
The laws of economic development are objective laws. They arise and
operate on the basis of definite economic conditions independent of men’s will.
Men can understand these laws and utilise them in society’s interests, but they
can neither abolish nor create economic laws.
The utilising of economic laws in class society always has a class character:
the advanced class of each social formation makes use of economic laws to
serve the progressive development of society, while the moribund classes resist
this.
Each mode of production has its own basic economic law.
This basic economic law expresses the essence of the given mode of
production and determines its main aspects and line of development.
Political economy
“must first investigate the special laws of each separate stage in the
evolution of production and exchange, and only when it has completed this
investigation will it be able to establish the few quite general laws which hold
good for production and exchange as a whole”. (Engels, Anti-Dühring, 1936,
Lawrence & Wishart edition, p.165.)
Consequently, the development of the various social formations is governed
both by their own specific economic laws and also by those economic laws
which are common to all formations, e.g., the law of obligatory correspondence
of the production relations to the character of the productive forces. Hence
social formations are not only marked off one from another by the specific
economic laws inherent in each given mode of production, but also are linked.
together by a few economic laws which are common to all formations.
Political economy studies the following basic types of production relations
which are known to history: the primitive-communal system, the slave-owning
system, feudalism, capitalism, socialism. The primitive-communal system is a
pre-class system. The slave-owning system, feudalism and capitalism are
different forms of society based on the enslavement and exploitation of the
working masses. Socialism is a social system which is free from exploitation of

man by man.
Political economy investigates how social production develops from lower,
stages to higher stages, and how the social orders which are based on
exploitation of man by man arise, develop and are abolished. It shows how the
entire course of historical development prepares the way for the victory of the
socialist mode of production. It studies, furthermore, the economic laws of
socialism the laws of the origin of socialist society and its subsequent
development along the road to the higher phase of communism.
Thus political economy is the science of the development of the socialproductive, i.e., economic, relations between men. It elucidates the laws which
regulate the production and distribution of material wealth in human society at
the different stages of its development.
The method of Marxist political economy is the method of dialectical
materialism. Marxist-Leninist political economy is built up by applying the
fundamental propositions of dialectical and historical materialism to the study
of the economic structure of society.
Unlike the natural sciences -physics, chemistry, etc.- political economy
cannot make use in its study of the economic structure of society of
experiments or tests carried out in artificially created laboratory conditions
which eliminate phenomena that hinder examination of a process in its purest
form. “In the analysis of economic forms neither microscopes nor chemical
reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both.” (Marx,
Capital, vol. I, Kerr edition, p. 12.)
Every economic system presents a contradictory and complicated picture.
The task of scientific research consists in revealing by means of theoretical
analysis the deep-seated processes and fundamental features of the economy
which lie behind the outward appearance of economic phenomena and express
the essential character of the particular production relations concerned,
abstracting these from secondary features.
What emerges from such scientific analysis is economic categories, i.e.,
concepts which represent the theoretical expression of the real production
relations of the particular social formation concerned, such as, for example,
commodity, value, money, economic accounting, profitability, work-day, etc.
Marx’s method consists of gradually ascending from the simplest of economic
categories to more complex ones, which corresponds to the progressive
development of society on an ascending line, from lower stages to higher.
When such a procedure is used in investigating the categories of political
economy, logical investigation is combined with historical analysis of social
development.
Marx, in his analysis of capitalist production relations, singles out first of all
the everyday relationship which is the simplest of all and the most frequently
repeated-the exchange of one commodity for another. He shows that in the
commodity, this cell-form of capitalist economy, the contradictions of capitalism
are laid up in embryo. With analysis of the commodity as his point of
departure, Marx explains the origin of money, discloses the process of
transforming money into capital, the essential nature of capitalist exploitation.
Marx shows how social development leads inevitably to the downfall of
capitalism, to the victory of communism.
Lenin pointed out that political economy must be expounded in the form of

the characterisation of the successive periods of economic development. In
conformity with this, in the present course of political economy, the basic
categories of political economy -commodity, value, money, capital, etc.- are
examined in the historical order of succession in which they arose at different
stages in the development of human society. Thus, elementary concepts
concerning commodities and money are presented already when pre-capitalist
formations are being described. These categories are later set forth in fullydeveloped form when capitalist economy, in which they attain their full
development, is being studied. The same order of exposition will also be
employed when socialist economy is dealt with. An elementary notion of the
basic economic law .of socialism, of the law of planned, proportional
development of the national economy, of distribution according to work done,
and of value, money, etc., will be given in the section devoted to the
transitional period from capitalism ‘ to socialism. An expanded treatment of
these laws and categories will be given in the section “The Socialist System of
National Economy”.
Political economy, unlike history, does not undertake to study the historical
process of society’s development in all its concrete variety. It provides basic
concepts concerning the fundamental features of each system of social
economy. Besides political economy there are also a number of other scientific
disciplines which are concerned with the study of economic relations in the
various branches of the national economy on the basis of the laws discovered
by political economy-industrial economics, agricultural economics, etc.
Political economy studies, not some transcendental questions detached from
life, but very real and living questions which affect the vital interests of men,
society, classes. Are the downfall of capitalism and the triumph of the socialist
system of economy inevitable; do the interests of capitalism contradict those of
society and of the progressive development of mankind; is the working class
capitalism’s grave-digger and the bearer of the idea of the liberation of society
from capitalism-all these and similar questions are answered differently by
different economists, depending on which class’s interests they voice.
That is just why there does not exist one single political economy for all
classes of society, but instead several political economies: bourgeois political
economy, proletarian political economy, and also the political economy of the
intermediate classes, petty-bourgeois political economy.
It follows from this, however, that those economists are quite wrong who
assert that political economy is a neutral, non-party science, that political
economy is independent of the struggle between classes in society and not
connected either directly or indirectly with any political party.
Is it possible in general for a political economy to exist which is objective,
impartial and does not fear the truth? Certainly this is possible. Such an
objective political economy can only be the political economy of that class
which has no interest in slurring over the contradictions and sore places of
capitalism, which has no interest in preserving the capitalist order: the class
whose interests merge with the interests of liberating society from capitalist
slavery, whose interests coincide with the interests of mankind’s progressive
development. Such a class is the working class. Therefore an objective and
disinterested political economy can only be that which is based on the interests
of the working class. This political economy is the political economy of

Marxism-Leninism.
Marxist political economy is a very important component of Marxist-Leninist
theory.
The great leaders and theoreticians of the working class, K. Marx and F.
Engels, were the founders of proletarian political economy. In his work of
genius, Capital, Marx revealed the laws of the rise, development and’ downfall
of capitalism; and showed, the economic grounds for the inevitability of
socialist revolution and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Marx and Engels worked out in general terms the theory of the transition
period from capitalism to socialism and of the two phases of communist
society.
The economic teachings of Marxism underwent further creative development
in the works of V.I. Lenin, founder of the Communist Party and the Soviet
State, brilliant continuer of the work of Marx and Engels. Lenin enriched
Marxist economic science by generalising the new experience of historical
development, created the Marxist teaching on imperialism, revealed the
economic and political nature of imperialism, provided the initial propositions
for the basic economic law of modern capitalism, worked out the fundamentals
of the theory of the general crisis of capitalism, created a new, complete theory
of socialist revolution, and worked out scientifically the basic problems of the
building of socialism and communism..
Lenin’s great companion-in-arms and pupil, J.V. Stalin, put forward and
developed a number of new propositions in political economy, based on the
fundamental works of Marx, Engels and Lenin which had created a really
scientific political economy.
Marxist-Leninist economic theory is creatively developed in the resolutions of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and of the fraternal Communist
Parties and the works of the pupils and companions-in-arms of Lenin and
Stalin-the leaders of these parties, who have enriched economic science with
new conclusions and propositions on the basis of generalising the practice of
the revolutionary struggle and of the building of socialism and communism.
Marxist-Leninist political economy is a powerful weapon of ideas in the hands
of the working class and of all working mankind in their struggle for
emancipation from capitalist oppression. The living strength of the economic
theory of Marxism-Leninism consists in the fact that it arms the working class
and the working masses with knowledge of the laws of the economic
development of society, giving them clear prospects and confidence in the
ultimate victory of Communism.

Part One
PRE-CAPITALIST MODES OF PRODUCTION

CHAPTER I
THE PRIMITIVE COMMUNAL MODE OF PRODUCTION
The Rise of Human Society
The rise of man belongs to the present, the Quaternary period of the earth’s
history, which science reckons as a little less than a million years. In various
regions of Europe, Asia and Africa distinguished by their warm and moist
climates there dwelt a highly developed species of anthropoid ape. As a result
of a very long development, which included a number of transitional stages,
from these remote ancestors there originated man.
The emergence of man was one of the greatest turning points in the
development of nature. This turning point took place when man’s ancestors
began to make implements of labour. The fundamental difference between
man” and animal starts only with the making of implements, though they be
the very simplest. It is well known that apes often use a stick or stone to knock
fruit from a tree or to defend themselves from attack. But not a single animal
has ever made even the most primitive implement. The conditions of their daily
lives drove man’s ancestors to make implements. Experience taught them that
sharpened stones could be used for defence against attack or for hunting
animals. Man’s ancestors began to make stone implements, striking one stone
against another. In this way a start was made in the making of implements.
With the making of implements labour begins.
Thanks to labour the fore-paws of the anthropoid ape were converted into
the hands of man. Remains of the ape-man-a transitional stage from ape to
man-found by archaeologists afford evidence of this. The ape-man’s brain was
much smaller than the human brain, but his hand was already comparatively
little different from that of man. It follows that the hand is not only an organ of
labour, but also its product.
As hands became freed for acts of labour, man’s ancestors acquired an ever
more upright gait. Once the hands were occupied with labour the final
transition to an upright gait took place, and this played a very important part in
making man.
Man’s ancestors lived in hordes, or herds; the first men also lived in herds.
But between men there arose a link which did not, and could not, exist in the
animal world: the link through labour. Men made implements jointly and jointly
they applied them. Consequently, the rise of man was also the rise of human
society, the transition from the zoological to the social condition.
Men’s common labour led to the rise and development of articulate speech.
Language is the means, the implement by which men communicate with one
another, exchange opinions and achieve mutual understanding.
The exchange of thoughts is a constant and vital necessity, since without it
the common activities of men in their struggle with the forces of nature, and
the very existence of social production, are impossible.
Labour and articulate speech had a decisive influence in perfecting man’s

organism, in the development of his brain. The development of language is
closely linked with the development of thought. In the process of labour man’s
circle of perceptions and conceptions was widened, his sensory organs were
perfected. Man’s labour activities became conscious acts as distinct from the
instinctive activities of animals.
Thus, labour is “the prime basic condition for all human existence, and this
to such an extent that, in a sense, we have to say that labour created man
himself”. (Engels, “The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to
Man”, Man: and Engels, Selected Works, 1950, English edition, vol. II, p. 74.)
Thanks to labour, human society arose and began to develop.

Conditions of Material Life. The Development of the
Implements of Labour
In primitive times man was extremely dependent on his natural
surroundings; he was completely weighed down by the difficulties of existence,
by the difficulties of his struggle with nature. The process of mastering the
elemental forces of nature went on extremely slowly, since the implements of
labour were extremely primitive. Man’s first implements were roughly chipped
stones and sticks. They were like artificial extensions of his bodily organs: the
stone, of his fist, the stick, of his outstretched arm.
Men lived in groups whose numbers did not exceed a few dozen persons: a
greater single number could not have provided food for themselves. When
groups met clashes sometimes took place between them. Many groups
perished from hunger or became the prey of wild animals. In these conditions
labour in common was for men the only possible form of labour and an
absolute necessity.
For a long time primitive man lived mainly by means of food gathering and
hunting, both carried out collectively with the help of the simplest implements.
What was jointly obtained was jointly consumed. Cannibalism occurred among
primitive men as a consequence of the precariousness of the food supply. In
the course of many thousands of years, as though groping their way, by means
of an extremely slow accumulation of experience, men learned to make the
simplest implements suitable for striking, cutting, digging and the other very
simple activities which then almost exhausted the whole sphere of production.
The discovery of fire was a great victory for primitive man in his struggle with
nature. At first men learned to make use of fire which had arisen naturally.
They saw lightning set fire to a tree, observed forest fires and the eruptions of
volcanoes. The fire which had been obtained by chance was long and carefully
preserved. Only after many thousands of years did man learn the secret of
making fire. With more advanced production of implements men observed that
fire came from friction and learned to make it.
The discovery of fire and its application gave men dominion over specific
natural forces. Primitive man had finally broken away from the animal world:
the long epoch of his becoming human had been completed. Thanks to the
discovery of fire the conditions of material life for man changed fundamentally.
First, fire could be used to prepare food, as a result of which the number of
edible objects available to man was increased: it became possible to eat fish,
meat, starchy roots, tubers and so on prepared with the help of fire. Secondly,

fire began to play an important part in making the implements of production.
Thirdly, it “also afforded protection against cold, thanks to which it became
possible for men to spread over the greater part of the world. Fourthly, fire
afforded a defence against wild beasts.
For a long time hunting remained the most important source of the means of
existence. It provided men with skins for clothes, bones with which to make
implements, and meat which influenced the further development of the human
organism and primarily the development of the brain.
As his physical and mental development progressed man became able to
perfect his implements. A stick with a sharpened end served for hunting. Then
he began to fix sharpened stones to the stick. Stone-tipped spears, stone axes,
scrapers and knives, harpoons and fish-hooks appeared. These implements
made possible the hunting of large animals and the development of fishing.
Stone remained the chief material for implement-making for a very long
time. The epoch when stone implements predominated, which lasted for
hundreds of thousands of years, is called the Stone Age. Only later did man
learn to make implements of metal; at first of native metal, in the first instance
copper (but copper, being a soft metal, was not widely used to make
implements), later of bronze (an alloy of copper and tin), and finally of iron.
Thus, after the Stone Age the Bronze Age followed, and after that the Iron
Age.
The earliest traces of the smelting of copper in Hither Asia date from the fifth to fourth
millennia B.C. In Southern and Central Europe the smelting of copper arose in approximately
the third to second millennia B.C. The oldest traces of bronze in Mesopotamia date from the
fourth millennium B.C.
The earliest traces of the smelting of iron have been discovered in Egypt and Mesopotamia;
they date from before 2000 B.C. In Western Europe the Iron Age began about 1000 B.C.

The invention of the bow and arrow, with the appearance of which hunting
began to provide more of the necessities of life, was an important landmark on
the road to improving the implements of labour. The development of hunting
led to the origin of primitive cattle-breeding. Hunters began to domesticate
animals. The dog was domesticated earlier than other animals, and later goats,
cattle, pigs and horses.
The origin of primitive agriculture was a further great stride in the
development of society’s productive forces. While gathering fruits and roots of
plants, primitive men began to notice that grains which were dropped on the
ground sprouted. Thousands of times this remained uncomprehended, but
sooner or later the connection of these phenomena was established in primitive
man’s mind, and he began to cultivate plants. Thus agriculture arose.
For a long time it remained extremely primitive. The earth was broken up by
hand, at first with a simple stick, then with a stick with a hooked end, a hoe. In
the river valleys the seeds were scattered on the mud which had been brought
down by the river floods. The domestication of animals made possible the use
of cattle for draught purposes. Later, when men learned to smelt metal, and
metal implements appeared, their application made agricultural labour more.
productive. Tillage acquired a firmer basis. Primitive tribes began to adopt a
settled mode of life.

The Production Relations of Primitive Society.
Natural Division of Labour
Production relations are determined by the character and condition of the
productive forces. In primitive communal society the basis of production
relations is communal property in the means of production. Communal
property corresponds to the character of the productive forces in this period.
The implements of labour. in primitive society were so crude that they
prevented primitive man from struggling with the forces of nature and wild
animals singlehanded. “This primitive type collective or co-operative
production”, Marx wrote, “was, of course, the result of the weakness of the
individual and not of the socialisation of the means of production.” (“Rough
drafts of Marx’s Letter to Vera Zasulich”, Marx and Engels, Works, Russian
edition, vol. XXVII, p. 681.) Hence came the necessity for collective labour, for
common property in land and other means of production as well as in the
products of labour. Primitive men had no conception of private ownership of the
means of production. Only certain implements of production, those which were
also implements of defence against wild animals, were their private property,
used by separate members of the commune.
Primitive man’s labour created no overplus beyond what was essential for
life, that is no surplus product. In such conditions there could be no classes or
exploitation of man by man in primitive society. Social property extended only
to small communities which were more or less isolated from one another. As
Lenin put it, the social character of production here embraced only the
members of one community.
The labour activity of men in primitive society was based on simple cooperation. Simple co-operation is the simultaneous application of more or less
considerable labour force to perform work of the same kind. Even simple cooperation gave primitive men the possibility of performing tasks which would
have been unthinkable for a single man (for example, in hunting large
animals).
In the extremely low level of development of productive forces which then
existed the meagre food was divided equally. There could be no other division,
since the products of labour scarcely sufficed to satisfy the most essential
needs: if one member of a primitive community received more than the share
which was equal for all, then someone else would be doomed to starvation and
death. Thus, equal distribution of the products of common labour was
inevitable.
The custom of equal division was deeply rooted among primitive peoples. It has been
observed by travellers living among tribes at a low level of social development. More than a
hundred years ago the great naturalist Darwin made a voyage round the world. Describing the
life of tribes on Tierra del Fuego he relates the following incident: The Tierra del Fuegans were
given a piece of canvas; they tore the canvas into completely equal parts so that each one
should have an equal share.

The basic economic law of primitive communal society consisted in the
securing of the vitally necessary means of existence with the help of primitive

implements of production, on the basis of communal. ownership of the means
of production, by means of common labour and the equal distribution of the
products.
As the implements of production are developed, division of labour arises. Its
simplest form was the natural division of labour, i.e., division of labour
dependent on sex and age, between men and women, between adults, children
and old people.
The famous Russian traveller Miklukho-Maklai, who in the second half of the nineteenth
century studied the life of the New Guinea Papuans, thus describes the collective process of
labour in tillage. Several men stand in a row and. thrust sharpened sticks deep into the soil and
then, with one heave, raise a great lump of earth. The women follow after them crawling on
their knees. In their hands they have sticks with which they break up the soil raised by the
men. Children of various ages go behind the women, rubbing the soil out with their hands.
After the soil has been crumbled the women, using little sticks, make depressions m the soil
and bury seeds or plant roots in them. Labour here is collective in character and at the same
time there exists division of labour by sex and age.
